@c Copyright (C) 2016 Kai T. Ohlhus
@c
@c This file is part of Octave.
@c
@c Octave is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
@c under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
@c Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at
@c your option) any later version.
@c
@c Octave is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
@c ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
@c FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
@c for more details.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c along with Octave; see the file COPYING.  If not, see
@c <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

\input texinfo

@documentencoding UTF-8

@setfilename publish.info

@settitle GNU Octave - publish

@node Top
@top Publishing code with GNU Octave

@menu
* Publish Octave script files::
* Publishing Markup::
@end menu

@node Publish Octave script files
@chapter Publish Octave script files

The function @code{publish} provides a dynamic possibility to document your
script file.  Unlike static documentation, @code{publish} runs the script
file, saves any figures and output while running the script, and presents them
alongside static documentation in a desired output format.  The static
documentation can make use of @ref{Publishing Markup} to enhance and
customize the output.

@DOCSTRING(publish)

The counterpart to @code{publish} is @code{grabcode}:

@DOCSTRING(grabcode)

@node Publishing Markup
@chapter Publishing Markup

@menu
* Using Publishing Markup in script files::
* Text formatting::
* Sections::
* Preformatted code::
* Preformatted text::
* Bulleted lists::
* Numbered lists::
* Including file content::
* Including graphics::
* Including URLs::
* Mathematical equations::
* HTML markup::
* LaTeX markup::
@end menu



@node Using Publishing Markup in script files
@section Using Publishing Markup in script files

To use Publishing Markup, start by typing @samp{##} or @samp{%%} at the
beginning of a new line.  For Matlab compatibility @samp{%%} is treated the
same way as @samp{%%}.

The lines following @samp{##} or @samp{%%} start with only one of either
@samp{#} or @samp{%} followed by at least one space.  These lines are
interpreted as section.  A section ends with the first line not starting
with @samp{#} or @samp{%} or the end of the document is reached.

A section starting in the first line of the document, followed by another
start of a section that might be empty, is interpreted as a document
title and introduction text.

See the example below for clarity:

@example
@group
%% Headline title
%
% Some *bold*, _italic_, or |monospaced| Text with
% a <http://www.octave.org link to GNU Octave>.
%%

# "Real" Octave commands to be evaluated
sombrero ()

## Octave comment style supported as well
#
# * Bulleted list item 1
# * Bulleted list item 2
#
# # Numbered list item 1
# # Numbered list item 2
@end group
@end example



@node Text formatting
@section Text formatting

Basic text formatting is supported inside sections, see the example
given below:

@example
@group
##
# @b{*bold*}, @i{_italic_}, or |monospaced| Text
@end group
@end example

Additionally two trademark symbols are supported, just embrace the letters
@samp{TM} or @samp{R}.

@example
@group
##
# (TM) or (R)
@end group
@end example



@node Sections
@section Sections

A section is started by typing @samp{##} or @samp{%%} at the beginning of
a new line.  A section title can be provided by writing it, separated by a
space, in the first line after @samp{##} or @samp{%%}.  Without a section
title, the section is interpreted as a continuation of the previous section.
For Matlab compatibility @samp{%%} is treated the same way as @samp{%%}.

@example
@group
some_code ();

## Section 1
#
## Section 2

some_code ();

##
# Still in section 2

some_code ();

### Section 3
#
#
@end group
@end example



@node Preformatted code
@section Preformatted code

To write preformatted code inside a section, indent the code by three
spaces after @samp{#} at the beginning of each line and leave the lines
above and below the code blank, except for @samp{#} at the beginning of
those lines.

@example
@group
##
# This is a syntax highlighted for-loop:
#
#   for i = 1:5
#     disp (i);
#   endfor
#
# And more usual text.
@end group
@end example



@node Preformatted text
@section Preformatted text

To write preformatted text inside a section, indent the code by two spaces
after @samp{#} at the beginning of each line and leave the lines above and
below the preformatted text blank, except for @samp{#} at the beginning of
those lines.

@example
@group
##
# This following text is preformatted:
#
#  "To be, or not to be: that is the question:
#  Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
#  The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
#  Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
#  And by opposing end them? To die: to sleep;"
#
#  --"Hamlet" by W. Shakespeare
@end group
@end example



@node Bulleted lists
@section Bulleted lists

To create a bulleted list, type

@example
@group
##
#
# * Bulleted list item 1
# * Bulleted list item 2
#
@end group
@end example

to get output like

@itemize @bullet
@item Bulleted list item 1
@item Bulleted list item 2
@end itemize

Notice the blank lines, except for the @samp{#} or @samp{%} before and
after the bulleted list!



@node Numbered lists
@section Numbered lists

To create a numbered list, type

@example
@group
##
#
# # Numbered list item 1
# # Numbered list item 2
#
@end group
@end example

to get output like

@enumerate
@item Numbered list item 1
@item Numbered list item 2
@end enumerate

Notice the blank lines, except for the @samp{#} or @samp{%} before and
after the numbered list!



@node Including file content
@section Including file content

To include the content of an external file, e.g. a file called
@samp{my_function.m} at the same location as the published Octave script,
use the following syntax to include it with Octave syntax highlighting.

Alternatively, you can write the full or relative path to the file.

@example
@group
##
#
# <include>my_function.m</include>
#
# <include>/full/path/to/my_function.m</include>
#
# <include>../relative/path/to/my_function.m</include>
#
@end group
@end example



@node Including graphics
@section Including graphics

To include external graphics, e.g. a graphic called @samp{my_graphic.png}
at the same location as the published Octave script, use the following syntax.

Alternatively, you can write the full path to the graphic.

@example
@group
##
#
# <<my_graphic.png>>
#
# <</full/path/to/my_graphic.png>>
#
# <<../relative/path/to/my_graphic.png>>
#
@end group
@end example



@node Including URLs
@section Including URLs

Basically, a URL is written between an opening @samp{<} and a closing @samp{>}
angle.

@example
@group
##
# <http://www.octave.org>
@end group
@end example

Text that is within these angles and separated by at least one space from the
URL is a displayed text for the link.

@example
@group
##
# <http://www.octave.org GNU Octave>
@end group
@end example

A link starting with @samp{<octave:} followed by the name of a GNU Octave
function, optionally with a displayed text, results in a link to the online
GNU Octave documentations function index.

@example
@group
##
# <octave:DISP The display function>
@end group
@end example



@node Mathematical equations
@section Mathematical equations

One can insert LaTeX inline math, surrounded by single @samp{$} signs, or
displayed math, surrounded by double @samp{$$} signs, directly inside
sections.

@example
@group
##
# Some shorter inline equation $e^@{ix@} = \cos x + i\sin x$.
#
# Or more complicated formulas as displayed math:
# $$e^x = \lim_@{n\rightarrow\infty@}\left(1+\dfrac@{x@}@{n@}\right)^@{n@}.$$
@end group
@end example



@node HTML markup
@section HTML markup

If the published output is a HTML report, you can insert HTML markup,
that is only visible in this kind of output.

@example
@group
##
# <html>
# <table style="border:1px solid black;">
# <tr><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr>
# <tr><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr>
# </html>
@end group
@end example


@node LaTeX markup
@section LaTeX markup

If the published output is a LaTeX or PDF report, you can insert LaTeX markup,
that is only visible in this kind of output.

@example
@group
##
# <latex>
# Some output only visible in \LaTeX or PDF reports.
# \begin@{equation@}
# e^x = \lim\limits_@{n\rightarrow\infty@}\left(1+\dfrac@{x@}@{n@}\right)^@{n@}
# \end@{equation@}
# </latex>
@end group
@end example

@bye
